JUDY WOODRUFF: Finally
tonight: an inside look at the
relationship and the political
partnership between President
Trump and his controversial
adviser Steve Bannon.
In Joshua Green's new book,
"Devil's Bargain: Steve Bannon,
Donald Trump, and the Storming
of the Presidency," he examines
how Bannon became a prominent
nationalist conservative
voice that helped create
one of the biggest upsets
in American politics.
Green is also a senior national
correspondent for Bloomberg
Businessweek, and he joins me
now.
Welcome to the "NewsHour."
JOSHUA GREEN, Author, "Devil's
Bargain: Steve Bannon, Donald
Trump, and the Storming of
the Presidency": Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, Josh
Green, you start the book
out saying Donald Trump
wouldn't be president
if it weren't for Steve Bannon.
In a nutshell, who
is Steve Bannon?
JOSHUA GREEN: Bannon is
a guy who is very much an
outsider like Donald Trump is.
And although he doesn't come
from money -- he was raised in
a blue-collar Navy family in
Richmond, Virginia -- he has
the same basic outlook toward
life and toward elites that
Donald Trump developed.
Bannon has a very
unusual background.
He joined the Navy.
He went from the Navy to
Harvard Business School.
He talked his way into a
job with Goldman Sachs as an
investment banker in the 1980s,
and moved from there to
Hollywood film financing,
and eventually became a
conservative documentarian,
met the late conservative
provocateur Andrew
Breitbart, and wound up
in charge of Breitbart
News, the right-wing news site.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, what
brings these two men together?
Are they the ideological,
philosophically similar
people some might think?
What is the magic that
brings them together?
JOSHUA GREEN: I think the magic
that brings them together is
that they have the same basic
political outlook.
If you look at Trump and what
he said about politics going
all the way back to the 1980s,
there have been several
clear populist themes.
He is against free trade.
He thinks the U.S. is
getting taken advantage
of by foreign governments.
Bannon's populism is
very much the same, but
he adds the element of
immigration, hostility
to immigrants, both
legal and illegal.
And when Bannon met Trump in
2011 and began tutoring him
on politics, that was the idea
that he really put forward.
And if you look at the
politician Donald Trump
became, it's very much
a reflection of Steve
Bannon's politics.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Is this -- so,
is this something that's driven
by being against outsiders?
JOSHUA GREEN: It really is.
It's driven by the idea that
the country is in decline and
needs to fundamentally return
to an earlier time, when people
like Steve Bannon were at the
heart of the American economy
and American story, so the
1950s, when you had a strong
manufacturing base, when there
were -- it was clear, the
forces of good and evil in the
world, communism vs. democracy.
Both Trump and Bannon don't
like the rise of the younger,
multiethnic generations of
Americans that the Obama
coalition reflected,
and are doing everything
they can to fight
against it.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, speaking
of that, what we have read
about Steve Bannon, Breitbart,
elements of racism, the
so-called alt-right movement,
even anti-Semitism, how much of
that is a strain here?
JOSHUA GREEN: It's a big strain.
And one of the effects that
Bannon had on politics was to
open up a kind of sluice gate
of people who existed really
only on the fringes of American
and far-right talk radio and on
Internet boards and try and
bring them into the political
conversation, the mainstream
political conversation,
by giving them a voice on
places like Breitbart News.
And what Bannon thought he
was doing was marshaling
these hidden political
forces to go up against
not Democrats, but the
establishment Republican
leaders, people like
Mitch McConnell, Paul
Ryan and, before him,
House Speaker John Boehner,
who was Bannon's original
target and was forced
to resign in 2015, in
part because of the
energies that Bannon and
Breitbart News unleashed
in Washington politics.
JUDY WOODRUFF: OK,
on just as straight a
measurement as you can, how
successful has Steve Bannon
been in getting his ideas
across in this administration?
JOSHUA GREEN: Well, it
would be hard to argue
that Bannon hasn't been
shockingly successful
overall.
If you go back three years --
and I tell this story in the
book -- Steve Bannon was very
closely allied with Jeff
Sessions, who, at the time, was
the populist Republican senator
from Alabama.
And Bannon tried to talk
Sessions into running for
president, not because
he thought he could
win, but because he
thought Sessions could
elevate the issues of
immigration and antipathy
to free trade to the top
of the Republican agenda.
And Sessions ultimately
decided not to do that.
But by linking up with Donald
Trump, Bannon was able to not
only get that on top of the
Republican agenda, but make
it all the way into the White
House and have real power to
enact some of these policies,
in a way that he never did
as a conservative publisher.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Is Bannon
involved in the Russian probe?
JOSHUA GREEN: So far, he seems
not to be directly implicated.
I know he hasn't hired
a lawyer, as many people
in the Trump family and
the Trump administration
have to defend them against
potential investigation.
So, as far as we know,
Bannon is not yet implicated
in the Russia scandal.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But you have
reported, I know, in, I guess,
language that we can't use here,
that Bannon is interested
in smearing Robert
Mueller as much as he can.
JOSHUA GREEN: Well, if you look
at what Steve Bannon really
does for Donald Trump, going
all the way back to
the beginning of their
relationship, it isn't
that he's a Machiavellian
figure, as he's been portrayed.
It's that Steve Bannon is the
guy who goes out and attacks
Trump's critics and his enemies,
whether that's someone like
Megyn Kelly at FOX News, or the
mainstream media after Trump's
"Access Hollywood" tape
was released on the
eve of the debates.
Right now, Trump feels
like he needs someone
aggressively defending
him in the Russia probe.
And he wasn't happy with the
way that his own White House
spokespeople were doing the
job.
JUDY WOODRUFF: If you look at
the polls right now, in -- I
guess, in large part, Donald
Trump seems to be holding
on to his base, but there is
some evidence of slippage.
And you have got, what,
40 percent of Americans
with a strong opposition
to Donald Trump.
If it continues this way, does
Steve Bannon stay where he is?
JOSHUA GREEN: I think it does,
because Bannon and Trump both
seem to believe that it is
absolutely vital to keep
Trump's base angry and
riled up and active.
And there is some pretty
interesting polling data to
indicate that that's working.
The Washington Post/ABC had a
poll that came out this week
saying that only 9 percent of
Republicans thought that
the Russia collusion
posed any sort of problem.
And, to me, that's an
indication that Bannon's
methods are working.
And while he hasn't gotten
Trump anywhere near a majority
of popular support, he has
managed to maintain that
critical 40 percent base that
Trump is going to rely on.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, Josh Green,
nobody else has gotten this
deep a look at Steve Bannon.
So, thank you very much.
"Devil's Bargain" is the book,
"Steve Bannon, Donald Trump, and
the Storming of the Presidency."
Thank you very much.
JOSHUA GREEN: Thanks
so much for having me.